you are listening to part one of two of
our conversation with Chris Bash
[Music]
welcome to Sky Blue symposia a convivial
gathering for stimulating conversation
and a free exchange of ideas we're so
glad you could join as friends I'm Susan
your host and here at our Round Table
are bridge sabelle and chipper and today
Chris bash is kind enough to join us for
a new Symposium as we continue
consciously exploring welcome Chris it's
so nice to have you with us thank you
Susan it's a real pleasure to be part of
your conversation
today well we're we've been anticipating
this and uh we're all very interested in
your field so I think we're going to
have a cracking time good but I'd like
to start off by talking a bit about
stanislav GRS his extraordinary
accomplishments as a scholar healer
Pioneer of transpersonal theory and
practice I wonder if you'd be uh happy
to tell us a bit about Stan's work and
most especially how it's influenced your
path your decisions and your use of uh
psychedelic
inquiry well Stan's been a huge
influence on my life uh I met Stan's
work his books the beginning of a series
of books books when I first came out of
graduate school in
1978 and his work in Ian Stevenson The
Scholar on reincarnation but
particularly Stan's work changed the
direction in the course of my personal
and professional life Stan is a
psychiatrist and the foremost authority
of the uh influence of LSD and
psychedelics in General on Consciousness
and the uh integrating of psychedelics
into the psychotherapeutic process he
had been working for many years in Czech
Sakia uh at psychiatric Institute he
came to the United States and was the
director of research at Spring Grove
Hospital in Baltimore and after a number
of years there he went to elen where he
was a senior research fellow and worked
for many years in that peculiar that
very distinctive hotbed of human istic
and transpersonal psychology uh that we
all know and love as elen he has written
over a dozen books uh I think he's
really one of the most seminal thinkers
in Psychology and Consciousness studies
he's was the president for many years of
the International transpersonal
Association co-founder of transpersonal
assoc psychology with u
masslo and the ta the International
transpersonal Association bringing um
transpersonal psychology and
Consciousness studies around the world
and the series of conferences held in
multiple countries yes he's just been a
seminal thinker and what he did for me
was when I came out of graduate school I
was a a very well-educated atheistically
inclined agnostic I had assimilated the
the modern and postmodern critique of
religion and I was trained as a
philosopher of religion I had
assimilated that critique uh moving from
medieval Theology and the Protestant
Reformation and the emphasis on
scripture and then um the social and
scientific and psychological critique of
religion and then I'm met Stan's work
and Stan uh
basically put in front of me not only an
extraordinary model of
Consciousness but he outlined a
methodology for using psychedelics to
explore the Deep recesses of
Consciousness uh both for therapeutic
purposes but eventually the therapeutic
trajectory when one goes deep within
it's like the bottom of your there is no
bottom to your mind you drop right out
of the personal psych into the vast uh
expanse of the mind of the universe
itself so as a philosopher I mean I mean
I'm not a therapist and uh have not
primarily been concerned with exploring
psychedelics potential uh to heal but
I've been a philosopher and so my
interest has been to use psychedelics to
explore the Deep structure of
Consciousness to explore those
non-ordinary States Of Consciousness
through which we can experience the
deeper structure of reality
itself uh now of course that involves a
lot of healing uh but healing in a
shamanic sense going Beyond you know
conventional Western senses of healing
healing of not only the psyche but
healing of the soul but then uh
exploring healing at a deep existential
level as one explores the various
structure
of of uh well of the Universe I just
couldn't pass that opportunity down so
my problem was it was 1978 we were past
the the Timothy L era and all the we're
past the 60s things had calmed down some
and my government had made psychedelics
illegal and so I had a hard choice to
make and the choice I made was
to uh conscientiously and resp
respectfully use these
substances in a um systematic uh 20
yearlong inquiry which I kept separate
and out of my professional life as much
as possible I'm I'm an academic so I'm a
university Professor here in Ohio but in
my background life I began this regimen
of systematically exploring the deeper
reaches of
Consciousness and uh
that influence I brought that into my
academic work in a very modest way but
it's really been only now uh that I've
retired that I'm trying to give a
systematic accounting of the full nature
of that Journey that I went on that is
fabulous absolutely fabulous um and it's
so needed right now and I think the time
is actually ripe for this and uh as we
were discussing before we started the
the Symposium it seems that iasa is the
uh path that is most available to people
at least in North America and uh but I
think people will find their own way to
whatever they need whatever they can to
open up these Avenues I think we're
we're starving for it yes yes yeah and
uh so I appreciate very much what you're
saying and sabelle you had the next
question you were going to ask yeah um
so Chris for a beginner what actually
happens in a psychedelic session and
what's the difference between using
psychedelics
recreationally or using them
therapeutically or
spiritually yeah well uh there are many
different psychedelics of course and so
if we were to take this conversation
down to a more precise level we have to
discuss specific psychedelics and how
they interact with
Consciousness um but generally the
category of drugs that we call
psychedelics are uh are Consciousness
amplifiers they they are amplifiers and
catalysts of Consciousness so that what
they do is is hypers sensitized
consciousness with a particular perhaps
a tilt one way or the other but they
hypersensitized Consciousness so that
what happens in a session is actually
not simply a function of the Psychedelic
but it's a the function of Consciousness
itself so Consciousness becomes hyper
energized hypers sensitized in a very
short period of time and then there is a
u a confrontation that the deeper
contents of the what is previously we
would call you know the unconscious the
contents of the unconscious begin to
surface into one's awareness and one
literally becomes aware of dimensions of
one's mind that one previously had not
been aware
of if you take psychedelics
recreationally uh you basically most
people would be trying to stay in
contact with the physical world and stay
in Con in the identity of their ego and
then they're entertaining the ego by
having some type of hallucinatory
experience where there is a blending
between the what's arising from the
unconscious and one's physical
environment and there is a tendency to
sort of uh often focus on
um aesthetic aspects uh visual aspects
hallucinatory aspects engaging in
sensory awareness through music or sight
or sound and uh or if there is a kind of
um therapeutic aspect it's
engaging the surface of Consciousness
the psychodynamic level one's personal
history um a
second modality of working well is
working therapeutically and working
spiritually what I would call much more
serious work where you try to harness
all that energy of that hypers
sensitivity so you isolate yourself from
the physical world people will work at
night uh they'll work you basically
create a psychological space of the the
keas of the southwestern uh Native
Americans where you isolate yourself
from the world you're wearing
headphones uh you're wearing ey Shades
you're listening to very carefully
scripted music um you have a
sitter uh where you're basically create
conditions where you provide Max
confrontation with the content of your
Consciousness uh that opens up depths
which very seldom surface in just
recreational tripping and I have very
little experience with recreational
tripping all of my work has been in this
therapeutic modality in this shamanic
modality of working with
psychedelics and so when the content of
one's Consciousness begins to
surface
um one literally usually what happens in
the early stages is stresses and strains
that we have kept at arms length or
existential questions or doubts and
uncertainties that we usually try to
stay away from uh Paramount for example
would be the fear of death and
Extinction these these begin to surface
and come at you and how you meet them if
you if you meet them in an embracing way
uh one goes through a
certain uh encounter a certain
engagement where you confront your
deepest fears um you engage the most
profound questions that human beings uh
ask themselves and you let the universe
take you where uh where it wants to take
you and there are a series of crises
that emerge of varying
depths and the varying types and usually
usually there is um a crisis that
ferments and develops into a critical uh
crisis a critical kind of point of
impass and if you surrender uh to this
impass if you surrender to whatever it
is that wherever your session is taking
you wherever Consciousness is taking you
you will go through a type of death and
rebirth process you'll go through a
complete surrender where some part of
your life or some part of life as you
have known it will fall away will U just
combust you'll die some part of you will
die and then you find yourself waking up
uh in a completely different reality a
larger reality a new reality a reality
that you had never expected previously
and a reality where the universe
operates by different laws and you're
you are a different kind of being than
you were in your previous
reality and that can be an exciting and
a terrifying process all at the same
time yeah so kind of what I'm hearing
though is that like someone will take an
anti-depressant and and there's some
brain chemistry going on with this this
medication MH and even you know with
with psychedelics there's some
brain chemistry that's going on but
you're really talking about consciously
taking this and and moving it forward in
a certain direction rather than just
having brain chemistry is that yes I'm
I'm not addressing the the physiology of
of psychedelics at all the brain
chemistry of psychedelics I'm not really
competent to discuss that I'm really
addressing just the psychoactive
properties of these
substances my understanding is basically
we don't yet know how psychedelics work
I mean really we don't we don't we don't
understand we understand some of the
biochemistry of it but we don't really
understand completely how they work but
we've been using them for thousands of
years as a human species and we have a
great deal of experience working with
them so we do understand a lot about how
they work psychologically and
spiritually yeah yeah yeah well thank
you yeah yeah well this is Susan again
Chris um when psychedelics are not used
to entertain the ego sort of a spiritual
materialism but instead the intent is
this spiritual process that with an
intention of a personal ego death
MH what happens is is it
um this existential death is that a
guarantee before you can you can move
past that that you it is about facing
one's deepest existential
fears and that's kind of the Ring pass
knot that you have to go
through I think that's
inevitable uh I want to if I get lost in
this in my answer bring me back to the
question of dose in Low Dose versus high
dose but I think it's inevitable that
one comes to these uh thresh of
impass because
uh we have to reverse image the reverse
imagine everything we know about
Consciousness we tend to think of our
Consciousness as small and by doing this
we are opening our Consciousness to
something larger but actually uh I think
it would be better to start with what
emerges in the work itself is that an
understanding that Consciousness is our
Consciousness is actually infinite
absolutely yeah so it starts with and
somehow in taking birth in
incarnating we have
voluntarily uh accepted a contraction of
Consciousness and we stayed within that
contraction so that we begin to think
that that's what our consciousness is
that our Consciousness is kind of person
sized but our Consciousness is is really
as large as the universe itself so if
one if one starts to open to the Natural
dimensions of your own mind you have to
free yourself from that con contraction
so the the easier it is for you to
surrender the identity that you have
developed over all your lifetime the
easier it is to open to these deeper
currents of mind
if it the harder it is the more
challenging it is so but that there will
always be a crisis that challenges you
to let go of everything you think you
are everything you have known as real uh
your whole vision of yourself and
reality that seems inevitable if you if
you're going to push the
limits uh deeply to basically remember
what you've
forgotten now you can do this in two
different modalities you can do it in
lowd do work where you basically
energize the the psyche just a little
bit and you peel back the layers of
these contracted identities in small
incents or you can work with high doses
where you
basically consume those contractions you
break through those contractions in in
Leaps and Bounds in a way where you
force a larger confrontation and explode
through those shells and run more
quickly and more into the deeper nature
of of mind now and you mentioned shells
plural yeah lot that implies that yes
that there's more than one and that uh
suggests uh cycles of death and rebirth
and initiation and does that
happen through the course of this long
period Well I can't
imagine I can't imagine that you would
want to that it even we would be capable
of doing that in a short period of
time yeah the universe is so big she's
so beautiful and there's so many layers
of depth to her she's so magificent
that uh it takes years I think and even
lifetimes more than one lifetime to
explore the farther reaches of
her um Let Let me give just put myself
back in my own history so I don't make
false claims I mean I made a choice
early on in my work after a half dozen
or so sessions to work exclusively in a
high do
regimen so uh that really has shaped the
trajectory of my work I've always worked
with very high doses of LSD kind of
causing maximum combustion maximum
explosion and maximum absorption into
the universe itself it would have been I
don't recommend that if looking back on
it what I if I knew then what I know now
I think I would have taken a a gentler
approach but at the time it seemed like
you know the most reasonable way to to
go into this uh this adventure of
learning um the Fool's the Fool's
Journey the Fool's Journey yeah and I
what you're absolutely right you go
through what I found is
that there are many layers of death and
rebirth that you go through in the
beginning death and rebirth is often
related to your personal identity your
personal history you're confronting the
limitations of that personal history and
then Stan as Stan gr describes it you go
into what he calls the perinatal level
of Consciousness which is the interface
between physical reality and spiritual
reality where the overarching themes
tend to be biological birth and physical
death overlaid with all sorts of
existential uh death rebirth the meaning
of life whether life has any meaning
whether it's significant whether we have
any significance in the larger order of
things and one often experiences this
existential crisis in the context of
actually reliving your biological
birth and one also can be reliving
deaths that you have experienced from
previous lifetimes it's a very complex
amalgam and the reason is because death
and birth is a revolving door it's how
we get back and forth between the world
of spirit so if you are going back
through the world of spirit through the
door into the world of spirit it's not
surprising that we would activate
memories of how we came back from the
world of the spirit into matter that is
through the womb so people relive their
their births uh and birth is a is a very
often painful and challenging uh
experience I mean put yourself in the
fetus's position uh being forced out
into the world yes and then when one
relives one's birth one is kind of born
back into the states of
Consciousness that the State of
Consciousness that you were in before
you were born so you're in spiritual
reality but it doesn't stop there
because because that spiritual world is
so
vast if you want to explore it has
layers to it and often these layers are
they've been described Ken Wilbur uses
the categories of psychic levels subtle
levels causal levels and nonu are
absolute levels different levels of
transpersonal
reality um if one is going
to allow yourself to be to be dissolved
deeper and deeper into the universe one
goes through layer after layer after
layer and there is a um there's a tax so
to speak as one goes into those layers
there is a a deeper yielding a deeper
Letting Go a a deeper kind of
Confrontation that takes place as one
opens to deeper and
deeper um dimensions of existence so
death and rebirth in this type of work
is a cycle it repeats itself many times
along the way uh and that simply is a
function of the the enormous depth and
breadth of the universe and of the
Divine that is so so beautiful and so
Rings true to my own experience yeah
really really really appreciate this
yeah thank you Chris I have a followup
on this um did you ever reach a point of
complet
complete
um giving of yourself or relaxation
allowing into the experience of
dissolving into universe or into
Source because um on a recent experience
of mine I experienced the dissolving
into source and then rebuilding myself
and dissolving into source and I mean it
was a continual process of cycling
through but there was I didn't have any
taxs or or any any um losing a parts of
myself other than losing myself
completely I I think many people who do
spiritual practice whether it's with
psychedelics or meditation or long-term
Retreat you know there psychedelics is
nothing that happens in psychedelics
sessions of this sort are unique in the
larger spiritual landscape of spiritual
practice there are many
methodologies that open us up to these
very deep dimensions of life so people
have and and one of the most common
experiences that people have who use
these practices at one at one time or
another is uh Return To Source you know
it's just the most natural thing in the
world it's it is a waking up to who we
always have been we don't become Source
we just return to Source we waken up we
dissolve into it we relax into it and uh
when and as you say we kind of you can
move back and forth kind of into the
source mode and then back into the
individualized the catalyzed individual
and then back into Source mode back and
forth and uh yeah those those hours
spent opening up to that part of
consciousness
that you have always been you were
before you were born you are while you
were born after you were born that you
always will be the the absolute source
and ground of all existence that which
is alive in you and that which is the
aliveness in all other life
forms um that is considered one of the
one of the
great healing and Awakening experience
at humankind can have to awaken to what
you truly are so our individual identity
whatever it is uh whoever we have
developed over hundreds thousands of
incarnations that individual identity
and the truth of our
individuality plays itself out against a
backdrop of a the other identity the
identity of totality the identity of
source the identity of the Divine if we
use theological
language my there is a sense in much of
the literature the viic literature and
different spiritual systems to think
that it's all about Return To Source
that the ultimately the goal of of
spiritual practice is simply to return
to source and if you dissolve completely
into source that is that is the end of
the line there is
a there is an end point and that is the
end end point to return to source and I
don't uh agree with that entirely for
two
reasons one of them is
that um it's been my experience that if
you do Return To Source and if you
return to Source
frequently and in a systematic
fashion that
Oneness Oneness itself has many layers
to it and Oneness cracks open to Revol
to reveal many different modalities and
layers of depth even into Oneness so
that rather than think that Oneness is
once you arrive at Oneness that is the
end of the journey I think what the
universe shows us is they're actually
infinite depths of the one infinite ways
in which the Oneness lives lives in the
universe or lives as the universe so
that I personally have given up the goal
of ever reaching the end of the
journey I think that
uh the Divine is far too vast and far
too uh extended a reality to to reach an
end point of the inquiry just it just
keeps has kept opening and opening to me
but the other reason I I have
reservations about the goal of the
journey is simply to open up to source
is is a larger cosmological
question I I think we come from Source
we come from the one and the one has
birthed the universe the domain of
differentiation and we exist here as
individual
beings but if the goal were simply to
return to one that ultimately leads to
the metaphysical visions that have
dominated our cultures in the last 5,000
years which are up out
cosmologies you achieve Awakening and
you leave you achieve
spiritual uh Consciousness or you return
to Source you awaken into Nirvana or uh
Moka and you leave because if you can be
in heaven why would you want to be on
earth because the spiritual world is
infinitely more satisfying than we can
be on earth and so all the cosmologies
of of Hinduism and Buddhism and
Christianity and all the world religions
have basically been up and out cosmology
the goal one way or another even for a
bodh SATA is to empty the world so that
we can all become enlightened and return
to Spirit but that I think is uh an
incomplete cosmology I think a deeper
cosmological vision is emerging more
recently now that we truly are absorbing
the the scale and scope of evolution and
that is the goal is not simply to awaken
to Source but to bring Source into an
Empower The evolutionary project to
actually embody to Incarnate the Divine
ever more fully in history so that we'll
be doing this for billions and billions
and billions years more so Awakening to
source is to me
midpoint it it's the turning point and
then
this the next point is to continue and
deepen consciously The evolutionary
project so bringing Heaven to Earth
rather than bring bringing
heaven heaven to Earth yeah bringing
Heaven to Earth and and basically
creating a greater
paracity so that uh there are fewer
membranes Between Heaven and Earth so
that one can live more consciously the B
citizenship that we all have we are
physical beings but we Are Spiritual
Beings and I think the evolutionary
trajectory is towards ever greater inter
penetration which is actually changing
and redefining what we think of as our
natural
capacities what we have the capacities
that we think of as human capacities and
are being dictated and limited by our
biology by our physics of of our our
bodies I think are actually simply uh
evolutionary staging areas they're just
evolutionary midpoints that our our
senses are evolving as Consciousness
evolves and just as we are becoming more
Soulful over multiple incarnations
literally are the way in which we see
and hear and think and feel the depth of
the entire project of Being Human I
think is expanding and will continue to
expand so that literally in the future
we will see differently we will hear
differently thank you it's definitely
something to work on achieving I think
chipper has the next question Chris that
sounds a whole lot like what I think of
as as fieldwork uh in that that inter
penetration that conscious inter
penetration of um awareness of of
shared awareness of this individuality
that Returns To Source over and over
again each of us brings
in the Divine as we're capable uh is a
uh is
happening quite rapidly over the last
two years uh I I've talked to people
that have become way more sensitive to
what they ingest what they associate
with what they
um take care of themselves with and
I that sensitivity I've felt personally
as a as an
expanding capacity for for field work I
guess yeah
yeah uh you know scientists are now
telling us that everything that we had
thought of previously as
particles particles are are really feels
if you get down into the deep Quantum
level of reality that particles are
really fields we are we are felds are
primary particles are
secondary and I think that's true of us
uh as of human beings too that we are
all interconnected in these vast
fields and we are interconnected to our
own history our reincarnational history
through the fields of Consciousness and
we are connected to each other through
the fields the morphic fields of the
human of the human psyche
and these fields I think are becoming
more energized in history that it's
almost like uh Nature has turned up the
fire and it's bringing the human psyche
to a boil uh I think that the collective
unconscious yung's Collective
unconscious the are the the the mind of
the species is actually becoming more
and more energized for a variety of
reasons uh so that and we all feel it I
mean we can feel this kind of
urgency kind of a crescendo that's
coming up underneath us and I think
there's a you know the first book I
wrote was on reincarnation and for me
reincarnation is just one of the simple
facts of life I mean and I think we're
coming to see that the empirical
evidence for reincarnation is incredibly
strong stronger than it's ever been
historically right and I think there is
a I think that the evolutionary sequence
which is underwritten by reincarnation
this is Progressive becoming more
conscious more aware more empowered
learning M from our mistakes ex
exercising new capacities there's
something happening now on the planet uh
there's an inter relationship between
the global crisis that we have entered
and uh an deep individual soul
fermentation that we have entered I
think the way I I language this is that
um I think the planetary crisis is
driving us past our limitations of the
past driving us to a global citizenship
driving us to a consciousness of Oneness
on the planet that's forcing us to
outgrow the divisions of our history of
our of our egoic Consciousness see them
for what they are anyway for sure yeah
see them for what they are I mean
they're they're real but they aren't the
they aren't the whole story and I think
that there's a parallel process taking
place at the very depths of the psyche
that there is a u psychologically at a
soulle level all of our previous lives
lives are coming together into critical
Fusion so that s Above So Below as
without So within so that as the world
enters deeper more and more deeply into
this
crisis uh there is an inner gestation
which is taking place so I think that
where this is taking us is that we are
literally giving
birth to the soul in history and by the
soul I mean the consciousness that
integrates all of our previous lives
into a singular Consciousness right
usually we only make contact with the
soul when we're dead when we enter the
BAU we retain we recover our full memory
and we usually give that memory up when
we are incarnate we shrink our memory
but if we keep that process shrinking
and expanding shrinking and expanding
sooner or later I think inevitably the
processes not just towards more
sophisticated individual egos but to the
birth of soulle Consciousness on the
planet intact so that our Consciousness
never is tempted to shrink to the limits
of just this body just this individual
uh
physical embodiment right I I think
we're giving birth to soul and and so
many people are feeling this they're
feeling this kind of deep Awakening in
their in their body in their psyche and
I think there's a relationship between
the crisis that we're all facing on the
planet so
that the global to in a nutshell the
global crisis is actually the womb which
is engendering what I call the birth of
the diamond soul in history and the
diamond soul is simply my way of
languaging what many people are
intuiting that consciousness of a higher
order a more complete order is
manifesting in time and by order I'm I'm
going to assum that you're you're
talking structure
structurally um conscious of itself yes
yeah the Deep identity the so identity
is emerging underneath the egoic
identity and it is absorbing and
bringing to fruition egoic
identity I think I really think like
many other people I think we are at a
cusp we literally cannot afford
to stay at the egoic level of conscious
evolution because ego is a divided
Consciousness which leads to a divided
World which leads to a competitive world
and a world of Rapid consumption and
violence right you order to aggrandize
that ego yeah I mean a divided
Consciousness leads to a divided world
and uh an awake Consciousness an
integrated Consciousness a soul embedded
Consciousness which is
conscious of the breath of our existence
conscious of the breath of of of Mind
leads to a compassionate World leads to
a world which is first healed and then
carried forward
into I think into in the creation of new
cultural forms I think we are just we
are really on the cusp of creating an
entirely new cultural form as many of
your your uh your participants in
previous conversations have pointed to
mhm right it it does seem to be a a
widespread topic of conversation these
days yeah Chris Chris for years I've
been feeling like we've been approaching
a collective initiation process yeah a
and um we may have to do it
individually to kind of get the ball
rolling so to speak but also that
as individuals do it it's done for the
collective yes and but also is the
collective doing it to
individuals yes I think yeah the
relationship of individual Consciousness
and Collective Consciousness
particularly in this evolutionary pivot
that we are making is really the the
dominant theme of my second book dark
night early Dawn where here I'm talking
about the Dark Night of the
soul and the the dawn of the rebirth
Consciousness but here the emphasis is
not on the rebirth of the individual or
The Dark Knight of the individual soul
but the Dark Knight of our Collective
Soul right so let me just back up and
just give you my particular perspective
here when I I reached a certain point in
the early stages of my own psychedelic
work where I had
already gone through a series of death
and rebirth experiences at the
individual level had had my ego
shattered in the different ways that
it's shattered in this type of work and
then what happened is that um I entered
into what I would describe as the ocean
of suffering I began to have
just for years uh sessions where the
suffering that I was confronting was not
personal the suffering was Collective
just vast tracks of human suffering of
all sorts of different orders of of
magnitude just shattering levels and and
first I was I asked myself what are all
these people doing in my therapy you
know what's Humanity doing showing up in
work which I had previously thought of
in terms of individual
transformation and what I came what I
came to understand over time is that uh
I may have thought that I was be doing a
process of individual transformation to
maybe contribute something to the
collective good but the universe doesn't
think in those terms no that that the
Universe the game that the universe is
involved with on our planet right now is
nothing less than the transformation of
humanity as a whole that's the game
that's where we have to go that's what's
happening so the collective psyche is
boiling and it is bringing its its
history forward outpouring in all sorts
of historical and social movements as
all the sins and toxicities of our past
are coming forward naturally we feel
this at an individual as well as
collective level and if you
do deep spiritual work it's people
find in hypnotherapy and in yoga work
and deep meditation practice or in
psychedelic work shamanic work that they
they begin
to
um open up into these vast tracks of
human
suffering which in my experience went on
for about uh three and a half four years
and I began to understand that the
patient in these sessions was not me the
patient was some some aspect of the
morphic field of the human
species so that it's the collective
Psych which is trying to heal itself and
taking advantage of the opportunity that
I had provided to heal itself and I
think that's happening in all of our
lives that we are all with one foot in a
personal world and one foot in a
collective world and so we're all
channeling a h a healing energy which is
pulling poisons out of the collective
psyche and putting healing energy into
the collective
psyche well this actually answers a
longtime question of mine because I've
had two near-death
experiences and I
trained as an existential and
transpersonal therapist and then
practiced at it as one for years but I
was in that field
of um experiencing things that had
nothing to do with me but and I was very
aware it wasn't mine it
was not only the an
ancestors m not just personal but the
collective and you know I take it back
and back and
back but when you
said the universe make or Source makes
use of those opportunities that makes
sense to me so if a an individual
through whatever means as you mentioned
makes themsel open or available that
source is going to use that opport Unity
that is really really helpful and
insightful
wow that that since we're all and I
think we all chose this we got knew what
we were getting into before we were born
we chose to enter into this time in
history even though we may have
forgotten that choice temporarily while
we're here there there are no victims
here and there are no innocence in a way
we all knowing ly Embrace this time in
history in order to be a
co-participant in this evolutionary
Journey that we are on and clearly the
fire is heating up and it's bringing out
these Collective threads where I think
they probably maybe weren't as
pronounced a thousand years ago but
they're very pronounced now
yeah my students have they have people
who are are not doing even doing this
sort of deep introspective work I've had
um so many
students recognize that there is more
going on in their pain and suffering and
their healing of their pain and
suffering than could possibly be
explained in terms of Simply their own
personal life and I was talking uh years
ago uh to Roger wilger who's you know is
passed on now one of the great past
lives therapist and he said he had come
to the same conclusion uh that he was
working with clients who were just
uncovering so many lives lifetime after
lifetime of pain and suffering he began
to realize that there was that somehow
in doing past life's therapy they had
become a midwife to a healing that was
reaching beyond the soul history as you
said reaching into the ancestors
reaching into the collective so that
their work may have begun as an
individual soul healing but it actually
had had changed into a much larger
Collective healing
exercise absolutely absolutely and and
like you said it's speeding up so much
now and it's quite overwhelming at times
for some people uh hopefully there's
enough information going out in like our
program here that give people um some
sort of structure that they might be
able to make some sense of of things or
if they don't know about it they feel
that somebody else can resonate with
what they're going through because I
imagine if people do experience it and
don't know what they're going through
that could be quite dangerous it would
be awful yeah yeah and there are times
when when you want you may need to step
back from the intensity of this work and
and there are other times when yeah you
you just and there are other times when
your life allows you to step more deeply
into
it and sometimes and just take a break
and time to integrate it all and be with
it and even see how your life whole life
changes as a result of it because it
will be drastically changed yes no doubt
about it yeah Chris could you tell us
the names of your books and maybe just a
brief synopsis about them uh the books
are the first one is called life cycles
reincarnation in the Web of Life uh it's
basically a book on reincarnation it
looks at reincarnation through uh the
issue of the empirical evidence it looks
at as a psychological and spiritual
phenomenon and then it once it documents
the empir iCal evidence for
reincarnation that then asks the
question so what what's the difference
if we see ourselves as reincarnating
beings versus one time through beings so
it's just one of the early attempts to
explore this the universe as a pulsing
throbbing uh reincarnating
Universe uh the second one is dark night
early Dawn which is a book in um the
philosophical study of non-ordinary
states of Consciousness uh specifically
psychedelic States Of Consciousness but
integrating uh psychedelic studies with
near-death episode research and outof
Body Research trying asking the question
is the qu is the universe as it shows
itself in near death episode research in
outof Body Research particularly Robert
Monroe's work at the Monroe Institute
and psychedelic research are those
pictures cohering or are they
fragmenting and uh so exploring that and
exploring the the ways in which our the
collective psyche shows up in the work
of individuals and the way the
individuals work influences and
contributes to our Collective Evolution
that integrated part yeah and the the
third book is called the living
classroom and all of these are you can
get them on Amazon or other books sites
the living classroom tells the story of
uh it's about feels of Consciousness uh
Collective Consciousness the subtler
background textures of Consciousness as
they surface in the classroom because
what I found over time was while I I
kept my personal life my quote personal
spiritual practice out of the classroom
because it's not appropriate to bring it
into the classroom that was my weekend
work what I found was that the work I
was doing in these very deep States Of
Consciousness outside of the class
began to impact my students in the
classroom and I began to understand and
and had to think about and theorize
about the collective the the nature of
collective Consciousness not at at the
species level but actually at a very
intimate level of the students that I
was working with week in week out year
after year so it's about teaching in
Collective
Consciousness so those are the three and
now I'm going back to the top IC of of
uh psychedelic work and trying to give
some type of philosophical description
or exploration of that 20-year
psychedelic uh Odyssey that I went on
Between 1979 and
1999 this completes part one of two of
our conversation with Chris Bash
[Music]
a
oh
[Music]